# LaTeX Repository for Writing New Software Engineering Papers with Empirical Evaluations

* [1. Introduction](#1-introduction)
* [2. Installing the Software You Will Need: LaTeX and Git](#2-installing-the-software-you-will-need-latex-and-git)
* [3. Getting Your Own Paper and Its Repository
  Setup](#3-getting-your-own-paper-and-its-repository-setup)
  * [Choosing a Name For Your Repository](#choosing-a-name-for-your-repository)
  * [Cloning and Initialising Your Repository](#cloning-and-initialising-your-repository)
  * [File and Directory Naming](#file-and-directory-naming--use-kebab-case)
* [4. Building Papers at the Terminal](#4-building-papers-at-the-terminal)
* [5. Sections of the Paper and What Goes In
  Them](#5-sections-of-the-paper-and-what-goes-in-them)
  * [The `clean.py` Script and Its Purpose](#the-cleanpy-script-and-its-purpose)
* [6. What _Shouldn't_ Be in Your Paper's
  Repository](#6-what-shouldnt-be-in-your-papers-repository)
  * [Types of Files That You Should Set Git to
    Ignore](#types-of-files-that-you-should-set-git-to-ignore)
  * [Put All Experimental Materials in a Separate
    Repository](#put-all-experimental-materials-in-a-separate-repository)
* [7. Setting up Your Writing
  Environment](#7-setting-up-your-writing-environment)
  * [Editor Settings - the `.editorconfig`
    file](#editor-settings---the-editorconfig-file)
  * [Install and Use a Spellchecker](#install-and-use-a-spellchecker)
* [8. General Writing Tips](#8-general-writing-tips)
  * [Avoid Passive Voice](#avoid-passive-voice)
  * [British or American Spelling?](#british-or-american-spelling)
  * [Numbers](#numbers)
  * [Further Writing Advice](#further-writing-advice)
  * [What to Do If the Advice Conflicts](#what-to-do-if-the-advice-conflicts)
* [9. Bibliography Management](#9-bibliography-management)

## 1. Introduction

This repository is designed to be used by researchers (particularly PhD and
Masters students) for writing a new research paper that they want to submit to a
software engineering conference or journal using LaTeX – or even just to create
an internal report, such as one that might be required by a PhD thesis
committee.

It provides a skeleton set of LaTeX files and folders (referred to as
"`new-paper`") that you can use to as an example structure in which to write your
own material, and customise your paper with additional macros.

This README file talks you through how to create your own paper repository on
GitHub using this one as a template, how to compile your paper and produce a PDF
file, along with some general writing and editing advice. 

The format described by `new-paper` assumes that you have researched a new kind
of technique or algorithm that have empirically evaluated. If you want to write
a purely empirical paper (i.e., where its novelty lies purely in your research
questions and the corresponding findings) you may need to tweak the sections.
However, it is not really suitable for a paper that involves only proofs and no
empirical study.

## 2. Installing the Software You Will Need: LaTeX and Git

First of all, you need to ensure that LaTeX and Git are setup on your machine,
if they are not already. 

See https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git and
https://www.latex-project.org/get for instructions on how to download and
install them for your operating system.

(If you are not already familiar with these tools, it is worth investing some
time learning about them first before you read any further.)

## 3. Getting Your Own Paper and Its Repository Setup

This repository is a _template repository_ meaning that you can use it as a
starting point for your own paper. Go to https://github.com/philmcminn/new-paper
and click the green button labelled "Use this template", and follow the
instructions on GitHub for creating your own repository. (Don't forget to make
your new repository private!) 

### Choosing a Name For Your Repository

In terms of the name of your repository, choose one that is indicative of the
paper's *research content*, rather than the conference venue or journal you
intend to submit it to. For example, "search-based-testability" is a better name
than "icse2020". This is because you may decide later to submit your work to a
different venue. Or, your work may not be accepted to the first venue you submit
to, and you may need to revise your paper and submit it to another. In either
case, the original venue name will no longer be a suitable choice of name for
your repository.

For the same reasons as those [detailed
later](#file-and-directory-naming--use-kebab-case), choose a name formatted in
"kebab-case" (i.e., all lower case with hyphens as word separators).

GitHub repositories can be re-named at any time. To do this, go the "Settings" tab.

> [!NOTE] 
> You may need to re-clone the repository on your local machine or simply connect 
your local repository to new url by `git remote set-url origin [NEW URL]`

### Cloning and Initialising Your Repository

Once you have created your repository, you can clone it to your machine. Go to
your repository's page on GitHub and click the green button labelled "Code". You
should then be able to copy it's URL, so that you can then clone it at the
command line with:

```
git clone [URL] 
```

### File and Directory Naming – use `kebab-case`

Over time, you will be adding your own files and content to your paper. The
various files and examples in this repository demonstrate how to go about doing
that.

Please ensure you stick to the coding standards described in the comments of the
paper. This helps ensure everything is consistent, that other people working
with you (i.e., me, and possibly other collaborators) can find things easily
(such as a figure file referenced using a certain label in a section file), and
in general helps uphold the [Principle of Least
Astonishment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_astonishment) for
others when working on the paper.

In particular, the repository opts to use
"[kebab-case](https://wiki.c2.com/?KebabCase)" for naming files and directories.
All file and directory names following the kebab-case convention are
lower-cased, with words separated with hyphens. Using lower-casing and not using
spaces (i.e., by using hyphens instead) in file and directory names ensures good
cross-platform compatibility.

## 4. Building Papers at the Terminal

Even if you're using an integrated development environment to compile your
paper, you will probably at some point need to compile the paper from a terminal
window. If you're working with me, then I don't mandate that you use a Make file
or any particular build tool, but I'm happy if that's what you want to do – so
long as you leave some instructions if they're needed. Some students just
include a build script in the root directory of their repository for
convenience.

The root file is `paper.tex`. To compile the example and produce a PDF file you
will need to run `pdflatex` as follows:

```
pdflatex paper
```

Later down the line you will have BibTeX
file(s) containing your references (see section on [bibliography management](#9-bibliography-management)), and you'll need to run `pdflatex` a couple
of times to resolve all of the references properly in the document:

```
pdflatex paper
bibtex *.aux
pdflatex paper
pdflatex paper
```

If you have not got any references defined, `bibtex *.aux` will produce
an error. So you just need to run `pdflatex paper` in the first instance. 

## 5. Sections of the Paper and What Goes In Them

Each .tex file in `new-paper` corresponds to part of the paper and includes
advice as to how to go about writing it. It should be obvious from the directory
names as to what goes in each, but the .tex files explains these also. 

You can delete or comment out this advice to make way for your own content.

### The `clean.py` Script and Its Purpose

Once you've been through this process a few times, feel free to run the Python
`clean.py` script, which will remove all the pre-written advice and all of the example
files and directories automatically.

## 6. What _Shouldn't_ Be in Your Paper's Repository

You can exclude files from the repository using the provided `.gitignore` file
as a starting point. This file lives in the repository's root directory, and
already covers some of the file types discussed next, although your particular
paper may develop to include some more.

### Types of Files That You Should Set Git to Ignore

Firstly, do not commit build files to the repository, in particular the target
PDF file (`paper.pdf`). You should also avoid committing:

* Temporary build files that LaTeX and BibTeX produce (e.g., `paper.aux`, etc.)

* Operating system files (e.g., `.DS_Store` on macOS) that can be particularly
  irritating for users of other systems.

* Editor backup files (e.g., `.bak` files), and editor settings files (e.g.,
  `.vscode`), if you can avoid them.

### Put All Experimental Materials in a Separate Repository

You should use a *separate* Git repository for all of your experimental data and
materials. That is, keep your paper repository for LaTeX files only, or
graphics/TikZ files etc. that are directly involved in the production of your
paper.

If the build of your paper needs to generate tables or figures from your raw
data, consider including it in the paper repository as a separate [Git
submodule](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules) instead. A Git
submodule is just a way of using some other Git repository in another, but where
the two repositories can still be maintained independently.

## 7. Setting up Your Writing Environment

I suggest you set up a development environment similar to one that you'd use for
developing software, but which will automatically compile your LaTeX and build a
PDF.

There are plenty of tools around to assist you in this process, and I have used
a number over the years. Currently, I use [Visual Studio
Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) (VSCode for short), which is free and open
source, with the [LaTeX
workshop](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=James-Yu.latex-workshop)
plugin. Among other things this plugin automatically builds my PDF every time I
make a change to a `.tex` source file. With VSCode, I can display the PDF in an
editor tab so that I can see it while I am working on it, and have it update
while I edit it. Others prefer more "traditional" solutions such as Vim or
Emacs, but you can use whatever you prefer.

### Editor Settings - the `.editorconfig` file
The repository provides an `.editorconfig` file (see https://editorconfig.org on
how to use with your text editor), which sets out my own preferences in terms of
whether to uses tabs or spaces (spoiler: it's spaces), indent sizes, etc. 

In Latex these settings are perhaps less important, and your personal
preferences may differ. This is fine, just don't [add any settings or backup
files produced by your editor to the
repository](#types-of-files-that-you-should-set-git-to-ignore) – your personal
choice can co-exist alongside that of your collaborators.

### Install and Use a Spellchecker

Whatever environment you use, ensure you have a spell checker installed! (Again,
VSCode has a plugin for one of these.) You will also find various other plugins
useful, for example those that manage tabs/spaces and remove trailing spaces in
your source text files.

## 8. General Writing Tips

The text and comments embedded in the `.tex` files of this paper discuss how to
go about writing each section of the paper. Check them out! They also discuss
the conventions you should follow and contain a number of tips on how to write
good LaTeX.

What follows is a more general overview of writing style that applies throughout
your paper:

### Avoid Passive Voice

First of all, please avoid passive voice. When you write in passive voice,
you're excluding the "actor" from the sentence so that objects have things done
to them rather than someone/something doing the action. This makes your
sentences vague and imprecise. For example, it's important to know whether the
steps in your empirical study were manual or automated (did you do them, or was
it done automatically by your tool?). Passive voice often excludes these details
and can confuse readers and referees. Consider the sentence "test suites were
generated for the subjects 30 times" (passive voice) vs. "our tool generated
test suites for the subjects 30 times" (active voice). In multi-author papers,
using "we" to say "we did it" is preferred to writing that something "was done",
and to convey something in an experiment that was necessarily manual step, or
involved you making a choice from a series of possible options. Any of these
could apply to when you want to write about deriving an algorithm, implementing
a tool, choosing a particular aspect of an experiment's design, and so on.

Sometimes it is difficult to identify passive from active voice! This is where
the "zombies" tip comes in useful: If you can add "by zombies" after the verb in
the sentence, and it still makes grammatical sense, you have a sentence written
in passive voice.

### British or American Spelling?

As I remarked earlier in these instructions, please ensure you use a spell
checker! Many text editors enable you to install a plugin so that you can see
any misspelled words while you're editing your document.

British English or American English? It may seem obvious to you, but it's best
to consult with your supervisor first. Here are some aspects you may want
to consider when making this decision in a reasoned, non-patriotic fashion!

Firstly, if you're planning to submit your thesis in Britain, it makes sense to
_use British English_, so that you can re-use the text from your paper without
potentially needing to change all the spellings later. Some PhD examiners will
be picky about this, and/or may (hopefully unduly) suspect the text has come
from sources other than you.

Consider again, however, if you're planning to submit your paper to a conference that has
double-anonymous ("double-blind") reviewing. This is where you don't know the
identities of the reviewers (as usual), but the reviewers don't know who _you_
are - the authors of the work - either. In practice, this means you shouldn't
put the names of authors in your paper or reveal any other details that the
reviewers may be able to use to identify who you are as the origin of the work.
In this situation you might opt to _use American English_. While I have not seen
the use of British English being in and of itself _against_ the rules of
conferences that employ double-anonymous reviewing, its use may help narrow down
the potential source of the work in the mind the reviewer (_"... ah this must be
John Smith, who's the only one who works on mutational search-based self-driving
causal large language models for software testing in England"_). Depending on
the context, being identified in this way may or may not be a good thing!

Finally, if you're working on a journal paper, note that some journals (particularly
American ones, obviously) will change all British spellings to American for the
final published (a.k.a. "camera-ready") version of the paper, regardless of your
original choice. 

At the end of the day, the most important thing is that everyone working on the
paper knows and agrees on which version of English the paper is using (and
doesn't keep changing the spellings from one version of English to another!).

Also, bear in mind that it's not just about spelling but also word choice, since
there are some words that are still used in every day British English that have
disappeared from American English. These words sound odd and quaint to the
American ear (so you may find them silently corrected in your paper, especially
if working with an American collaborator). Top of the annoyance list appears to
be the word "whilst". Use "while" instead. Check out [this page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_American_and_British_English) 
for a more detailed comparison.  

### Numbers

There are certain rules around writing numbers that just look "right" but
generally have no particular explanation, and are just part of generally
accepted scientific writing style. In general, numbers should appear as numbers,
but there are some special cases where you should write them out as words, for
example:

* At the start of sentence. Write "Thirty-seven of the subjects..." as opposed
  to "37 of the subjects...", or even better, just re-word the sentence so that
  the number doesn't appear at the start, as both look a little bit strange.

* Numbers less than 10, in the middle of a sentence, unless you're quoting actual
  data points from your experiment.

### Further Writing Advice

There are a number of good resources on the web, that you should check out too.

See, the following links, for example:

* [Advice for Writing LaTeX
  Documents](https://github.com/dspinellis/latex-advice), extensive guidance on
  LaTeX style, by Diomidis Spinellis.

* [Draft Guidelines for My Students on Writing Software Engineering Research Papers](https://cragkhit.github.io/files/harman-writing-advice.pdf),
  some excellent advice on writing papers by Mark Harman. 

* [Things I Keep Repeating About
  Writing](https://clegoues.wordpress.com/2016/08/23/things-i-keep-repeating-about-writing/),
  an excellent blog post by Claire Le Goues that covers more aspects and tips
  related to writing style than covered here.

* [My top ten presentation issues in other's
  papers](https://andreas-zeller.blogspot.com/2013/04/my-top-ten-presentation-issues-in.html),
  a collection of bug-bears in papers found by Andreas Zeller while reviewing
  papers, each of which you should avoid!

* [Guide to Punctuation](http://www.sussex.ac.uk/informatics/punctuation/toc) –
  a good and detailed guide to every punctuation symbol in English, and when to
  use it. Covers differences in American usages.

There are some popular text books that are worth looking at as well (you're
welcome to borrow them from me), these include:

* [BUGS in Writing: A Guide to Debugging Your
  Prose](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/601222.Bugs_in_Writing), by Lyn
  Dupre.

* [Writing for Computer
  Science](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/117973.Writing_for_Computer_Science),
  by Justin Zobel.

Finally, some good tutorial papers written by Mary Shaw. This are a little old
now, but the advice in them is still good and relevant!

* [Writing Good Software Engineering
Papers.](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~Compose/shaw-icse03.pdf) _Proceedings of the
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2003._

* [What Makes Good Research In Software
Engineering?](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~Compose/ftp/shaw-fin-etaps.pdf)
_International Journal of Software Tools for Technology Transfer, vol. 4, no. 1,
2002._

### What to Do If the Advice Conflicts

Bear in mind that sometimes the advice given is subjective, and hence
contradictory, in which case you're free to make up your own mind — although you
may wish to discuss it with your supervisor first! If the route you take has a
significant impact on the way you will write or structure your paper, you should
discuss and get the agreement of all of your collaborators.

For example, this repository chooses to structure papers by splitting its
content across several files. This is because I think it is better to structure
LaTeX documents in a modular fashion, much like a computer program. This
approach will help you re-use components of your papers that you have written
when you start to work on your Masters dissertation, or PhD thesis. A common
objection to doing it this way is that it makes it harder to find specific text
later. But, if you structure your files in the way this repository suggests,
finding things again should not be difficult – in fact, it should be very easy.
Furthermore, if you get really stuck, then it is not hard to use the "Find"
feature of a good text editor, so long as you include all the relevant files in
the scope of the search.

## 9. Bibliography management

You should use Bibtex for your bibliography. If you are using reference manager software like Zotero or Mendeley it's easy to export your library to `.bib` format. Once you already have bibliography you can uncomment the line in `paper.tex`.

```tex
\bibliography{bibtex/file_name}
```

I suggest keeping your bibliography in separate repository as maintaining separate bib files is a pain, especially if you're working on multiple papers simultaneously, the different copies can get out of sync. 

To do this you can use [git submodules](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules):

```
git submodule add [bib repo url] bibtex/your-bibliography
```

Having your bibliography set up you should be able to build your paper using:
```
pdflatex paper
bibtex *.aux
pdflatex paper
pdflatex paper
```
